---
title: Intro To D3, Transition Tween
updated: 2015-12-06
---

While learning to use D3, I encountered difficulties understanding the basics of what a tween is, and how to implement it.

First, let's look at [this](https://github.com/mbostock/d3/wiki/Transitions)

This is an extremely helpful document, but can be overwhelming. So, let's explore the very basic idea of tween:

Suppose a dot needs to move from point a to point b on the screen over some period of time. This dot has a starting (x,y) coordinate and an ending (x,y) coordinate. While the dot is moving it will be at a number of intermediate positions. These intermediate positions can be found by parameterizing with time, like so:

```javascript
intermediateX(t) = startX + (endX - startX)*t
intermediateY(t) = startY + (endY - startY)*t
```

We can say that its intermediate position as a function of time, and is equal to its starting position plus time multiplied by the difference between its end position and starting position, where time is between zero and one.

```javascript
intermediateX(0) = startX + (endX - startX)*0 = startX
intermediateX(1) = startX + (endX - startX)*1 = endX
intermediateY(0) = startY + (endY - startY)*0 = startY
intermediateY(1) = startY + (endY - startY)*1 = endY
```

So we see that as time goes from 0 to 1, the dot goes from its start to end.

How do we access all these intermediate positions? We can attach a custom tween function to a transition. This custom tween function must return a function. Inside the returning function, we are looking at a snapshot of the dot, during its transition.

```javascript
d3Selection.transition().duration(n)
  .tween('custom', customTween);

var customTween = function() {
  return function(t){
    // everything in here is at a intermediate position and time
  };
}
```
It is important to note that the parameter t, input of the returning function, as well as the parameter we discussed above, is not actually time, it's a parameter value between 0 and 1. It's easy to imagine a transition that takes longer than 1 second, or shorter. So this time variable is simply a parameterization of the start/end time. At 0, the transition is starting; and at 1, the transition has just completed. How long this transition takes depends on the variable n in duration(n).

Usually, the object that is transitioning is of interest, so we might want to query it during the transition. We can do that by creating a closure scope prior to the returning function like this:

```javascript
var customTween = function() {
  var obj = d3.select(this);
  return function(t) {
    // we can still access obj here, for example:
    console.log(obj);
  };
}
```

Hope that helps as an introduction to using tween for D3's powerful transition function.

One last note, the t parameter in the returning function will only be between 0 and 1. How it changes relative to real-world time is controlled by the easing function, which you can read about [here](https://github.com/mbostock/d3/wiki/Transitions#easing).
